[WIP] Connection handshake English spec (#42)
informalsystems/ibc-rs: docs/spec/connection-handshake/L1_2.md

# IBC Connection Handshake Spec

> Work in progress.

> All the content until section [2.2 Protocol] is stable and ready for review.

> Reviews are welcome.

## L1. Problem statement / outside view

Suppose there are two chains (e.g., distributed ledgers) that execute independently of each other.
What should be a basic abstraction for representing a path of communication between the two?
We use the term _connection_ to represent this path of communication.

> The purpose of the IBC connection handshake protocol, at the highest level of abstraction, is to enable two chains to establish a connection with each other [[ICS 003](#references)].

Reviewer: I think that it is more precisely to talk about connection establishment between two modules that are executing as deterministic state machines on different chains.

Author: I agree we should be precise and use these terms accurately.

I hesitated a lot between module, chain, and process. I ended up using "chain" as a compromise, but primarily motivated by two ideas: (1) connections are a per-chain abstraction (i.e., a chain executes the logic of establishing a connection; multiple modules  can share the same connection), and (2) the term _module_ is generic and overused (to an outsider reader, a "module" means not more than "subsystem" and so is quite vague; to an IBC expert, a [module](https://github.com/cosmos/ics/tree/master/spec/ics-024-host-requirements#module-system) is an implementation detail for separating different IBC functionalities).

It's worth noting that idea (1) is more complicated than what I wrote. It is very abstract to claim that a chain "executes the logic of establishing a connection". Concretely, this logic resides in a module. But this is just an implementation detail, just like the consensus logic of Tendermint Core resides in the "consensus reactor" (we don't usually speak about the reactor in high-level specs). This analogy to "reactors" was useful for me, but not sure how correct it is. What do you think?

- **[CH/Seq/2/Termination]** Eventually, the two processes should both finish the handshake, establishing a connection.

Requirement **[CH/Seq/1/Agreement]** represents the basic safety guarantee, while **[CH/Seq/2/Termination]** is the basic liveness guarantee we would like to have.

The diagram below sketches the high-level problem statement.

```
                        IBC Connection
     +-----------+    Handshake Protocol    +-----------+
     |           |<-------- step 1 -------->|           |
     | Initiator |    (execute handshake)   | Responder |
     |           |                          |           |
     |          _| (connection established) |_          |
     |         |c|<------------------------>|c|         |
     |          ▔|                          |▔          |
     +-----------+                          +-----------+
```

## L2. Protocol specification / protocol view

In this section we attempt to make the problem specification more concrete.
We define what the processes are, their fault-model, as well as communication and synchrony assumptions.

### 2.1 System model specification

#### System model

> A **chain** is a state machine.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A **chain** is a deterministic state machine.
```

Author: Hmm, I wasn't aware we require chains to be deterministic -- I was thinking that maybe randomized-based algorithms, e.g., Bitcoin, are allowed in IBC? But I guess when viewed from the "outside" (from the perspective of other chains and IBC) each chain must appear to behave deterministically -- is that what you mean?

Reviewer 2: Bitcoin has randomness in its consensus algorithm, but the state machine it replicates is still a deterministic state machine (deterministic function of the txs).

Each chain may be replicated, i.e., consisting of a replicated state machine (RSM), or it may be a standalone process.
In practice, there are certain requirements which each chain must satisfy (e.g., see [[ICS 024](#references)]).

> At this level of specification, however, we can assume each chain is a single **process**.

Reviewer: It is maybe better talking about module instead of chain as we can have multiple modules from some chain establishing connections with modules from remote chain.

Author: I'm not sure we need to introduce the term "module" to speak about connection handshake at this level of abstraction. I think we need two types of entities, not more: we can think of them as **client** (this is the user of the connection handshake, who initiates the protocol; the client is the external observer) and **server** (whoever it is that exposes the abstraction we're specifying here and implements the CH protocol).

In the current version of specification:
- client = application, and 
- server = chain = essentially an arbitrary process.

Should I modify this (also considering Anca's comment below) to be the following?

- client = actor, and
- server = module.

This would be more aligned with IBC specs terminology so would be useful! But in my view introduces unnecessary details that belong to implementation.

Author: After thinking more about this, another option would be to have the following scheme:

- client = actor
- server = module
- and a chain is an external process, communicating with a module.

Author: After more thinking, I will incorporate the notion of "module" as a part of a chain. Hope this will resolve inconsistencies.

> The connection handshake protocol is asymmetric, meaning that the two chains that interact play different roles within the protocol.

Reviewer: We should be careful here as every module (on corresponding chain) can act as both initiator and responder. Although protocol is asymmetric we cannot necessarily define a priori who is playing what role. In addition, there is potentially a problematic case in which both modules at the same time trigger connection handshake (act as initiator) and we want to formalise this case and talk about guarantees we provide in that case.

Author: Indeed, there are some tricky cases to consider there. I tried to rule out some of these corner-cases with the property **[CH/Proto/1/Uniqueness]**. As long as connections have different (unique) identifiers, they can proceed concurrently and should not matter who was initiator or responder.

We take advantage of this asymmetry and explicitly label one of the chains with `I` (the initiating, or source, process), and the other with `R` (the responder, or destination, process).

On top of each chain, one or multiple **applications** may be running (e.g., payment system or token exchanges, with their associated smart contracts).
In the context of the connection handshake problem, it is an application that invokes the connection handshake protocol, and provides the necessary input for executing this protocol (we give more details on the invocation & input in section [2.2 Protocol](#22-protocol) below).

> 

Reviewer 3: Maybe it is better to use the spec term of `actor` here.
 `An actor, or a user (used interchangeably), is an entity interacting with the IBC protocol. An actor can be a human end-user, a module or smart contract running on a blockchain, or an off-chain relayer process capable of signing transactions.`
It is possible that the connection is initiated by an end-user or relayer, and the handshake completed by the relayer.

At a high-level, the handshake protocol consists of processes `I` and `R` exchanging a few messages called **datagrams**.
Each datagram has a well-defined syntax which we describe later.
__[FIX: describe this and put ref to [2.2 Protocol](#22-protocol).]__

We define a **connection** as a bidirectional or unidirectional path of communication that applications on the initiator and responder chains use to exchange **packets**.

> Packets are payloads from the point of view of a connection; they contain arbitrary application-level data, and their content is opaque to a connection; suffice to say that applications generate and consume packets.

Reviewer 3: I am not sure about the correctness of these statements, what does it mean exactly "content is opaque to a connection"? or "packets are payloads from the point of view of a connection"? Where are the channels for example? The packets carry port and channel identifiers.

The code snippet below describes the communication layer API.
This API comprises a function `Send` for invoking the communication layer to send a datagram.
And there is a callback `Deliver` that each process executes upon delivering a datagram from the communication layer.

```golang
type CommunicationLayer interface {
    // A process `s` invokes this function to send a datagram `g` to
    // a destination process `d`.
    Send(g Datagram, d Process) null

    // This callback triggers at process `d` to deliver datagram `g`
    // that process `s` previously sent.
    Deliver(g Datagram, s Process) null
}
```

Neither of these functions are blocking, and they have no return value.
We also assume that datagrams cannot be tampered with, i.e., they are authenticated by the sender process when calling `Send`.
We assume that the destination process implicitly verifies authenticity upon calling `Deliver` for any datagram.

The communication layer is _asynchronous_.
There is no guarantee on how much time it will take for the destination of a datagram to deliver that datagram.

###### Fault assumptions

> This specification operates under the assumption that processes `I` and `R` are not faulty, i.e., do not deviate from any protocol we describe below.

Reviewer: My understanding is that we operate in the model where processes can behave arbitrarily (Byzantine fault), but guarantees are given only for correct case.

Author: Hmm, I think I was vague here. Maybe it would help to restate this as follows? "Processes `i` and `r` may be subject to arbitrary/Byzantine faults, but the properties we define below only hold as long as both `i` and `r` behave correctly.

2. A `State` is a data type that abstracts over the details of the state of a process at a current point in time (e.g., a summary or snapshot).
In the context of the CH problem, a process uses this data type to (i) declare their state to another process, and (ii) represent the state of another process.

Knowing the precise declaration of `ConnectionEnd` and `State` is not necessary in understanding the properties of the CH protocol.
Suffice to say that each `ConnectionEnd` has associated the `State` of both the initiator and responder process.
We will declare this data types later (see [2.2 Protocol](#22-protocol)).

We now restate the connection handshake problem in a slightly more precise (or lower level) formulation:
A connection handshake enables two processes to agree on a consistent view of their state, to verify each other's state, and to allocate a new connection.

###### Guarantees
We refine the safety guarantee **[CH/Seq/1/Agreement]**  (defined in the [sequential problem statement](#sequential-problem-statement)) by splitting this into four complementary safety properties:

- **[CH/Proto/1/Uniqueness]**

> If a process finishes a handshake for a `ConnectionEnd` `c`, no handshake has previously finished for `c`.

Reviewer 3: Would it be enough to say that `connectionEnd c` should be unique? Even intermediate stages of the handshake require there is no other handshake in progress or finished for `c`

- **[CH/Proto/2/Validity]**

> If either of the responder or initiator agree to a `ConnectionEnd` `c`, then the initiator proposed `c`.

Reviewer 3: I don't understand this.

Author: This means that a process never opens a connection having some details (encapsulated in variable `c`) unless that connection was in fact initiated with those precise details by the initiator. This property rules out bugs or corner-cases such as:

- a process proposes a connection `c` but opens a connection `c'` (i.e., there was tampering with `c` such as a man-in-the-middle attack).
- a process opens a connection `c` but there never existed a proposal to open this connection (the connection was fabricated/initiated by some other process).

None of the other properties cover these two corner-cases.

Author: I can add these insights in the .spec in the [remarks] section below the properties if they help!

- **[CH/Proto/3/StateConsistency]**
If process `i` establishes a connection with some process `r`, then process `i` has the `State` `si` representing process `r` and this state is consistent with the actual state of `r`.

- **[CH/Proto/4/StateVerification]**
If the processes establish a connection  for their respective `State` `si` (state of initiator) and `sr` (state of responder), then the initiator verified `sr` and the responder verified `si`.

The liveness property below is functionally identical to the **[CH/Seq/2/Termination]** property we defined earlier:

> - **[CH/Proto/5/Termination]** If the initiator and responder are correct, then the handshake eventually terminates (i.e., both processes allocate a new `ConnectionEnd` object).

Reviewer 3: should we say `correct termination` and require consistent `ConnectionEnd` objects?

Author: These properties are only intended to cover the case when both initiator and responder are correct, and in such a case, there is no possibility of incorrect/error termination. But you're raising a good point: what does it mean for a connection handshake to terminate incorrectly? Should we capture this in the specification?

- State verification.
Like uniqueness, processes verify each other's state by calling on a predicate `verify(s)` that returns true iff the input state `s` passes verification.

- State consistency.
This property is for ensuring that processes are not out of sync.
This property complements state verification: while verification ensures authenticity on the state of another process (_who_ is the other process), consistency ensures freshness on the state of another process (_what_ is the other process).
We assume there is a predicate `consistent(s)` that returns true iff the input state `s` is consistent.

### 2.2 Protocol

> The following section is work-in-progres..

The CH protocol consists of four datagrams that the initiator and responder exchange.
We enumerate the names of these datagrams in the following code snippet.

```golang
type ConnHandshakeInit struct {  }
type ConnHandshakeTry struct {  }
type ConnHandshakeAck struct {  }
type ConnHandshakeConfirm struct {  }

> ```

Reviewer 3: Should we use names closer to the IBC spec? Maybe they are not perfect but I think in this case using `ConnOpenInit`, etc. it's not too confusing. 
Also, the connection spec also covers the closing handshake.

Author: If we don't fix names now, we'll probably never do it and remain stuck with them. Note that these are protocol-level modifications, so should be backwards-compatible with the Go implementation. But I have no strong preference, it is just a proposal to make things more consistent.

Intuitively, a proof is helpful for some process `x` to guarantee to another process `y` that `x` is in a certain state.
Typically, a `StateProof` object is valid with respect to a `State` object.

The diagram below captures the handshake protocol at a high level, comprising the four datagram exchanges.
Note the direction of each arrow, indicating which is the sender and the destination process for each datagram, respectively.

```
               The four messages comprising
             IBC Connection Handshake Protocol

     +-----------+   ConnHandshakeInit   +-----------+
     |           |--------- 1 --------->>|           |
     |           |                       |           |
     |           |   ConnHandshakeTry    |           |
     |           |<<------- 2 -----------|           |
     | Initiator |                       | Responder |
     |     I     |   ConnHandshakeAck    |     R     |
     |           |--------- 3 --------->>|           |
     |           |                       |           |
     |           | ConnHandshakeConfirm  |           |
     |           |<<------- 4 -----------|           |
     +-----------+                       +-----------+
```

> 

Reviewer 3: This is not entirely correct. The `init` is sent to the initiator by some actor, the `try` should be from `I` to `R`, ...i.e. all arrows should be flipped here.

Author: Will fix this, it is wrong indeed!

> ###### Protocol handlers

Reviewer: It is probably useful taking a look at this high level spec: https://github.com/informalsystems/VDD/pull/5. We should probably try to align with protocol description style used there, i.e., defining process state and then set of functions (handlers) where preconditions and postconditions are defined. This avoids writing pseudocode (as TLA+ specs will have some) but put clear expectations.

func ConnHandshakeInit(
  identifier Identifier,
  clientIdentifier Identifier, counterParty CounterParty) {
    if connectionEnd != NilConnection then error

    connectionEnd.connectionIdentifier = identifier
    connectionEnd.clientIdentifier = clientIdentifier
    connectionEnd.state = INIT
    connectionEnd.counterParty = counterParty

    consensusStateB = getConsensusState(connectionEnd.clientIdentifier)

    datagram = ConnOpenTry(
    connectionEnd, getProof(connectionEnd),
    consensusStateB, getProof(consensusStateB))
    send (datagram, r)
}
```

```golang
func ConnHandshakeTry(
  connectionEnd_A Type, proofOfConnectionEnd Type,
  consensusStateB Type, proofOfConsensusStateB Type) {
    if connectionEnd != NilConnection then error

verifyConnectionState(proofOfConnectionEnd, connectionEnd_A) verifyClientConsensusState(proofOfConsensusStateB, consensusStateB)

connectionEnd = createConnectionEnd(connectionEnd_A)
connectionEnd.state = TRYOPEN

consensusStateA = getConsensusState(connectionEnd.clientIdentifier)

send ConnOpenAck( connectionEnd, getProof(connectionEnd), consensusStateA, getProof(consensusStateA))
}
```

> 

Reviewer 3: The code is not aligned, missing parenthesis, etc. It is not clear on what side (A vs B) these are run. I think code  and figure above are inconsistent.

The IBC connection handshake protocol, at the highest level of abstraction, enables two chains to establish a connection with each other [[ICS 003](#references)].
Throughout the rest of this document, we will often use the abbreviation "CH" to stand for "connection handshake" problem (or protocol, depending on the context).

<!-- The diagram below sketches the high-level problem statement. -->

A connection typically involves the two _parties_ of the communication (the respective chains), as well as a _relayer_ which handles message transmission between the parties.
The relayer carries a central responsibility in handshaking and maintaining a connection (described below .... TODO add ref.)
So a connection handshake is essentially a three-party protocol: an initiating party which we'll call Alice, a responder party called Bob, and a relayer Y.

#### Sequential problem statement

###### Definitions
When we speak of a party (either Alice or Bob), we identify three relevant abstractions:

- a _module_: this is the process which actually carries the job of executing the CH protocol;
- the _local state_ of the party;

> - the

Author: Oops, the version you reviewed was a work-in-progress (I should not have pushed that). Will be fixed in the next version!

To summarize, the purpose of a connection is to enable chains `I` and `R` -- as well as applications running on top of these chains -- to coordinate updates to their state.

###### Communication assumptions
We assume that process `I` and `R` have access to an underlying communication layer (e.g., message passing over TCP/IP) and each process has connectivity with the other.

The code snippet below describes the communication layer API.
This API comprises a function `Send` for invoking the communication layer to send a datagram.
And there is a callback `Deliver` that each process executes upon delivering a datagram from the communication layer.

```golang
type CommunicationLayer interface {
    // A process `s` invokes this function to send a datagram `g` to
    // a destination process `d`.
    Send(g Datagram, d Process) null

    // This callback function triggers at process `d` to deliver datagram `g`
    // that process `s` previously sent.
    Deliver(g Datagram, s Process) null
}

> ```

Author: I think we cannot call these processes `i` and `r`. Alice `i` and Bob `r` can be playing any of the role of sender _or_ destination in _both_ of the Send and Deliver functions.

These assumptions are: (i) partial synchrony is necessary for achieving liveness of a chain if that chain is implemented using a deterministic consensus protocol (e.g., Tendermint Core); (ii) synchrony is necessary for guaranteeing message delivery in any connection-oriented protocol such as TCP, which is most likely the underlying communication layer running between `I` and `R`.

#### Properties

###### Preliminary definitions
We introduce several abstractions that are relevant at this point:

1. A `ConnectionParty` is a data type encapsulating the identifier(s) of a party (either initiator or responder process) involved in a connection.
We can think of `ConnectionParty` as a concrete way of specifying a process in the CH protocol.

```golang
type ConnectionParty interface {
    ConnectionIdentifier    Identifier
    ClientIdentifier        Identifier
    Prefix                  Prefix // TODO -- keep this?
}
```

2. A `ConnectionState` captures the state of a connection, and may have one of the following values. [TODO: not valid Go code below, keep?]

```typescript
enum ConnectionState {
    INIT,
    TRYOPEN,
    OPEN,
}

> ```

Author: As far as I know, nope.
Note that I'm using [this](https://github.com/cosmos/ics/tree/master/spec/ics-003-connection-semantics#data-structures) as a guide. Let me know otherwise!

    - The invokation and properties at process `R` is analogous.

3. Function `consistent(State s, Process x)` return true or false. This is similar in purpose and function with `verify`, except is check the consistency of the state `s` as stored locally (at the invoker) with the same state remotely at process `x`.

Furthermore, process `I` receives as input the following:

- `State` `si` and `State` `sr`, representing the state of

# Stable guarantees start here

###### Guarantees
We refine the safety guarantee **[CH/Seq/1/Agreement]** (defined in the [sequential problem statement](#sequential-problem-statement)) by splitting this into four complementary safety properties:

- **[CH/Proto/1/Validity]**
If a module establishes a `Connection` `c`, then `c` is a _valid_ connection; validity is defined by an application-level predicate.

- **[CH/Proto/2/Uniqueness]**
If a module establishes a connection `c`, no handshake has previously finished for `c`; uniqueness is defined by an application-level predicate.

- **[CH/Proto/6/Termination]**
Eventually, the connection handshake terminates, i.e., both parties mark their respective `ConnectionEnd` as `open`.

- **[CH/Proto/7/Integrity]**

> If either Alice or Bob establishes a `Connection` `c`, then Alice proposed `c`.

Author: That's a very good point. I only understood later that any party can be the proposer in a connection. This is going to be amended to the following version:

> If any two modules establish a connection `c`, then either one module or the other or both modules proposed `c`.

It might be redundant to say "or both" but keeping it like that for the moment.

> If either Alice or Bob establishes a `Connection` `c`, then Alice proposed `c`.

Reviewer 4: I think "or both" should stay there, as it captures that *at least one* of the modules proposed `c`. You could also consider to formulate it as the contrapositive:
> If neither Alice nor Bob proposed a connection, then no connection between Alice and Bob is established.

```golang
func ConnOpenInit(a ConnectionParty, b ConnectionParty)
{
    // validity & uniqueness check for our side of the connection
    validateConnectionIdentifier(i.connectionIdentifier) || abort
    uniqueConnectionIdentifier(i.connectionIdentifier) || abort

    connectionEnd.state = INIT
    connectionEnd.initiator = i
    connectionEnd.responder = r
    connectionEnd.role = "initiator"

    consensusStateB = getConsensusState(connectionEnd.clientIdentifier)

    tryDatagram = ConnHandshakeTry(connectionEnd, getProof(connectionEnd),
        consensusStateB, getProof(consensusStateB))

    Send(tryDatagram, r)
}
```

###### Protocol Invariants

## TODOs & open questions

- What is the interface between an actor and the chain? Seems that the main event for triggering a connection is `connOpenInit` which the Handler implements [ICS 25](https://github.com/cosmos/ics/tree/master/spec/ics-025-handler-interface).
- Standard cryptographic assumptions (collision-resistant hash functions, public-key signatures)?
- Unsure if terminology is clear enough, e.g., `data type`...
- How to capture aborts?
- Add support for versions in ConnectionEnd

## Improvement suggestions

> - `ConnHandshakeTry` instead of `ConnOpenTry`. And similar renaming for the other handlers, replacing `Open` with `Handshake`, since this specification is for the connection _handshake_ problem, not the connection _open_ problem.

Author: I'm going back to calling everything `ConnOpenTry` for the moment. Agree we have to come to an agreement regarding these terms as soon as possible!

Intuitively, a proof is helpful for some module to guarantee that it is in a certain state.
We are concerned with connection proofs (`ConnProof` type) and client proofs (`ClientProof`) here.

```golang
type ConnProof struct {
  proof CommitmentProof // The proof for the connection that the remote party claims to have.
}
```

```golang
type ClientProof struct {
  proof CommitmentProof // The proof for the client that the remote party claims to have.
  height uint64 // The height which the client (on remote party) claims having.
}
```

We now restate the connection handshake problem in a slightly more precise (or lower level) formulation:

__A connection handshake enables two ICS3 modules to agree on a consistent view of their chain state, to verify each other's state, and to allocate a new connection.__

###### Guarantees
We refine the safety guarantee **[ICS3-Seq-1-Agreement]** (defined in the [sequential problem statement](#sequential-problem-statement)) by splitting this into three complementary safety properties:

- **[ICS3-Proto-1-ConnectionUniqueness]**

> If a module establishes a `ConnectionEnd` `e`, no handshake has previously finished for `e`.

Author: Indeed, there is something fishy here. I have to think more about it. I will partially fix this by removing the notion of "establish" and say "open" instead.

> If a module establishes a `ConnectionEnd` `e`, no handshake has previously finished for `e`.

Author: I think this is a more accurate statement of the uniqueness property we want:

> A module accepts (i.e., initializes on) a `ConnectionEnd` `e` at most once.

- **[ICS3-Proto-2-ConnectionIntegrity]**

> If any two modules establish a connection `e`, then either one module or the other or both modules accepted (i.e., initialized with) `e`.

Author: Will fix "establish".

- **[ICS3-Proto-3-StateConsistency]**
If any two modules establish a connection, then the client in the first module is consistent with the state of the second module.

The liveness property below is equivalent to **[ICS3-Seq-2-Termination]** (the livenes property in the sequential specification above):

- **[ICS3-Proto-5-Termination]**
If the two parties involved in a connection handshake are correct, then the connection handshake eventually terminates.

> Specifically, termination implies that each module allocates in the local state a new `ConnectionEnd` object with `state` field set to `OPEN`.

Author: In connection to `clientProof` we have this property:

> If any two modules establish a connection, then the client in the first module is consistent with the state of the second module.

> Specifically, termination implies that each module allocates in the local state a new `ConnectionEnd` object with `state` field set to `OPEN`.

Reviewer 3: I see. So it looks like `**[ICS3-Proto-3-StateConsistency]**` is property that holds after termination, while 1 holds at all handshake steps and 2 from `tryOpen` onwards. I am not suggesting adding this details there but trying to understand what exactly we want to specify here.

_Remarks_:

- Uniqueness property essentially provides a safeguard against overwritting a connection in the store with some new set of parameters.

- One of the mechanisms that enforces the connection integrity property consists of cryptographic proofs, specifically the `ConnProof` type, which asserts that a certain chain stores a certain connection in a certain state.

> - The `ClientProof` type helps guarantee the state consistency property, by asserting that the client of a certain chain is updated to a certain height of the remote chain.

Author: But as far as I'm aware there is no requirement in ICS3 on how __recent__ the consensus state on a client has to be. It would be useful to have a freshness guarantee, but is this enforced by `verifyClientConsensusState`, or where?

     |  ►INIT    |                         |           |
     |           |<-2.a--Relayer-----2.a-->|           |
     |           |                 |       |           |
     |           |                  \-> step 2.b       |
     |           |                     ConnTryHandler  |
     |           |                         | ►TRYOPEN  |
     |           <--3.a------Relayer--3.a->|           |
     |           |        |                |           |
     |      step 3.b <---/                 |           |
     |     ConnAckHandler                  |           |
     |  ►OPEN    |                         |           |
     |           |<-4.a---Relayer----4.a-->|           |
     |           |                 |       |           |
     |           |                  \-> step 4.b       |
     |           |              ConnConfirmHandler     |
     |           |                         | ►OPEN     |
     +-----------+                         +-----------+
```

#### Protocol handler signatures

We first present the signatures of the four protocol handlers; the connection handshake module at each party implements and exposes these handlers.

```golang

> func ConnInitHandler(local ConnectionParty,
>                   remote ConnectionParty)
> 
> func ConnTryHandler(local ConnectionParty,
>                  remote ConnectionParty,
>                  remoteVersions []String,
>                  proofsHeight uint64,
>                  remoteConnectionProof ConnProof,
>                  remoteClientProof ClientProof)
> 
> func ConnAckHandler(local ConnectionParty,
>                  remoteVersion String,
>                  proofsHeight uint64,
>                  remoteConnectionProof ConnProof,
>                  remoteClientProof ClientProof)
> 
> func ConnConfirmHandler(local ConnectionParty,
>                      proofsHeight uint64,
>                      remoteConnectionProof ConnProof)

Reviewer 3: It's time to fix alignments :) You can indent more if you want.
```suggestion
func ConnInitHandler(
    local ConnectionParty,
    remote ConnectionParty)

func ConnTryHandler(
    local ConnectionParty,
    remote ConnectionParty,
    remoteVersions []String,
    proofsHeight uint64,
    remoteConnectionProof ConnProof,
    remoteClientProof ClientProof)

func ConnAckHandler(
    local ConnectionParty,
    remoteVersion String,
    proofsHeight uint64,
    remoteConnectionProof ConnProof,
    remoteClientProof ClientProof)

func ConnConfirmHandler(
    local ConnectionParty,
    proofsHeight uint64,
    remoteConnectionProof ConnProof)
```

  // next steps of the connection handshake protocol.
  setConnection(local.connectionIdentifier, connectionEnd)
}
```

Preconditions:
  - The connection local end (the input `local` argument) should be valid, i.e., a syntactically correct.

Postconditions:
  - The module executing this handler stores a `ConnectionEnd` (matching with the input arguments `local` and `remote`) in state `INIT`.
  - Function produces no output; may abort if preconditions not met.
  - Uniqueness is satisfied because this handler aborts if a key with the identifier `local.connectionIdentifier` already exists in the store (at-most-once semantics).
  - To ensure termination of the ICS3 protocol, this handler must execute either on one of the chains or both (at-least-once semantics).

###### ConnTryHandler

This is step 2.b.

```golang
func ConnTryHandler(local ConnectionParty,
                    remote ConnectionParty,
                    remoteVersions []String,
                    proofsHeight uint64,
                    remoteConnectionProof ConnProof,
                    remoteClientProof ClientProof)
{ 
  // Create local end of the connection.

>   connectionEnd = NewConnectionEnd(

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  connectionEnd = newConnectionEnd(
```

      'TRYOPEN', local, remote, pickVersion(remoteVersions));

  // Uniqueness check.
  // Verify that either there is no connection OR it is in INIT state (i.e., 
  // the Init handler previously executed with these same parameters).
  currnt = getConnection(local.connectionIdentifier)
  if currnt != nil {
    abortTransactionUnless(currnt.state = 'INIT')
  }
  abortTransactionUnless(currnt == nil || matchingEnds(connectionEnd, currnt))

>   expectedConn = NewConnectionEnd('INIT', remote, local)

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  expectedConn = newConnectionEnd('INIT', remote, local, remoteVersions)
```

>   expectedClient = consensusState(remoteClientProof.height)

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  expectedClient = localConsensusState(remoteClientProof.height)
```

  // Proofs generic verification.
  // Generic proof check: The local client should already be updated with the
  // height which the two proofs target (proofsHeight).
  localClientState = clientConsensusState(local.clientIdentifier, proofsHeight)
  abortTransactionUnless(localClientState != nil)

  // Connection proof specific verification. See `verifyProof`.
  abortTransactionUnless(verifyProof(
      localClientState, remoteConnectionProof,
      connectionPath(local.connectionIdentifier), expectedConn))

  // Client proof verification. Helps ensure state consistency: The remote 
  // client should be consistent with the state of local party.
  abortTransactionUnless(remoteClientProof.height <= getCurrentHeight())

>   abortTransactionUnless(verifyProof(localClientState, remoteClientProof,
>         clientPath(local.clientIdentifier, remoteClientProof.height),
>         expectedClient))

Reviewer 3: to be consistently aligned with the above `ferifyProof`. I am just going over some but we should try to have nice alignment overall.
```suggestion
  abortTransactionUnless(
        verifyProof(localClientState, remoteClientProof,
        clientPath(local.clientIdentifier, remoteClientProof.height),
        expectedClient))
```

  // Proofs verification.
  localClientState = clientConsensusState(local.clientIdentifier, proofsHeight)
  abortTransactionUnless(localClientState != nil)

  // Connection proof specific verification.
  abortTransactionUnless(verifyProof(
      localClientState, remoteConnectionProof,
      connectionPath(local.connectionIdentifier), expectedConn))

  // Client proof verification.
  abortTransactionUnless(remoteClientProof.height <= getCurrentHeight())
  abortTransactionUnless(verifyProof(localClientState, remoteClientProof,
        clientPath(local.clientIdentifier, remoteClientProof.height),
        expectedClient))

  // Termination (partial -- only at this end)
  connectionEnd.state = OPEN
  connectionEnd.version = remoteVersion

  // Update the connectionEnd in local state.
  setConnection(local.connectionIdentifier, connectionEnd)
}
```

Preconditions:
  - The module executing this handler already has a `ConnectionEnd` stored locally, matching the `local` argument, and in state `INIT` or `TRYOPEN`.
  - The `local` argument is valid (syntactic check), and the `remoteVersion` is supported, i.e., compatible with the local chain -- see `getCompatibleVersions()`

>   - The two proofs `remoteConnectionProof` and `remoteClientProof` are syntactically and semantically correct; for guaranteeing properties [ICS3-Proto-2-ConnectionIntegrity] and [ICS3-Proto-3-StateConsistency]

Reviewer 3: Why isn't this in the `tryOpen` also? I also want to make sure it is clear what syntactically correct means (non-null proofs? non-zero height?) and semantically correct (the proofs verify?)

Author: I removed the confusion around syntactic & semantic checks.

#### Helper functions & application-level predicates

##### `matchingEnds(endLocal, endRemote)`

Checks that the connection ends in the local and remote arguments match.
(NB: This does not check the connection state, only the connection parties).

###### Validation
When we talk of validation we usually mean a verification that is done before a handler executes, checking that the `local` connection party is syntactically correct.
In particular, the field `local.connectionIdentifier` is important, similar in functionality with `validateConnectionIdentifier` from [ICS 003](#references).
Additionally, if a `version` or `remoteVersion` input is also present, this should also be validated prior to invoking a handler with that version.

###### `pickVersion(counterpartyVersions)` 
This is identical with the one in [ICS 003](#references).

###### `getCompatibleVersions()`
This is identical with the one in [ICS 003](#references).

###### `constructConnectionProof()` and `constructClientProof()`

These functions are not shown here, but they are part of the relayer logic so we mention them nonetheless.

> These are more abstract variants of the `proof()` method that a connection implements (see [ICS 018](#references) in particular).

Reviewer 3: i think we can remove these as there is no detail and no one calls them.

###### `verifyProof`

This function handles the cryptographic verification of a proof.
It expects four arguments: the local client state, a proof, a path, and the expected data of the proof.

> This function is analogous to `verifyMembership` of the [ICS 023](#references), except it must additionally perform two actions: serialize the expected data of the proof, and to extract from the client state the path to the root of the tree.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This function is analogous to `verifyMembership` of the [ICS 023](#references), except it must additionally perform two actions: serialize the expected data of the proof, and to extract from the client state the root of the tree.
```

###### `consensusState` and `clientConsensusState`

These are analogous to `getConsensusState` and `queryClient` functions.

### Open questions:

- Standard cryptographic assumptions (collision-resistant hash functions, public-key signatures). We should mention these once we have more details about the implementation.

> - How to capture aborts or incorrect termination? See [issue raised by Anca](https://github.com/informalsystems/ibc-rs/pull/42#discussion_r397077901). Is this necessary? To inform this discussion, more implementation detials are neeeded.

Reviewer 3: (spellcheck?)
```suggestion
- How to capture aborts or incorrect termination? See [issue raised by Anca](https://github.com/informalsystems/ibc-rs/pull/42#discussion_r397077901). Is this necessary? To inform this discussion, more implementation details are needed.
```

```golang
type CommunicationLayer interface {
    // Write a new value (a connection) to the local store, indexed by the
    // identifier of the connection on the local party.
    private setConnection(i Identifier, e ConnectionEnd)

    // Relayer invokes this to `read` from a chains' local store.
    public getConnection(i Identifier) // returns a `ConnectionEnd`
    
    // Relayer invokes this to append a datagram into a chain's 
    // local store.
    public push("outstandingDatagrams", g Datagram)

    // A module consumes elements from its local store 
    // "outstandingDatagrams".
    private pop("outstandingDatagrams") // returns a Datagram
    // The typical use case is that for each datagram, this module invokes the 
    // corresponding handler, e.g., ConnOpenTry.
}
```

Preconditions:
  - the datagram `g` as well as Identifier `i` and Connection `e` (respectively for `push`, `setConnection` and `getConnection`) are non-null;

Postconditions:
  - for `setConnection`: the local store on the module implementing this function stores at position `i` the value `e`;
  - for `push`: the `outstandingDatagrams` queue will append the Datagram `g`

> Error condition: none

Author: Agree with `getConnection`. Added the following:

> Error condition: 
>   - `getConnection` may fail (returning `null`) if no `ConnectionEnd` exists for the input parameter `i`.

What are the conditions when `setConnection` may fail though?

> Error condition: none

Reviewer 3: For example when the client identified by `clientIdentifier` has not been created. It is true that the callers will do all the checks but here we just present an interface.

Properties of the communication layer:

- **[ICS3-CommAssumption-1-RWIntegrity]** If some process returns a connection `e` from `getConnection(i)` for some module, then the module previously invoked `setConnection(i, e)`.

> - **[ICS3-CommAssumption-2-QueueIntegrity]** If some module `d` returns a datagram `g` from `Pop("outstandingDatagrams")`, then a process previously invoked `Push("outstandingDatagrams", g)`.

Reviewer 3: yeah, not sure. it was "ditto" with a previous similar comment. re-reading it again, isn't it supposed to be reversed? meaning we do not lose messages? same question for the one above but there if `setConnection` has failed then get will not work.

> - **[ICS3-CommAssumption-2-QueueIntegrity]** If some module `d` returns a datagram `g` from `Pop("outstandingDatagrams")`, then a process previously invoked `Push("outstandingDatagrams", g)`.

Author: You're right, there should be a "no loss" property for the queue. This property would be similar to the one that @milosevic is trying to model in the Relayer English spec, which he calls 'Termination':

> Termination: In presence of correct relayer, message m sent by chain A to chain B is eventually received by chain B.

> Neither of the functions in this interface are blocking.

Author: This may be confusing. I meant to say that the functions guarantee to always return e.g., by timing-out or returning the adequate output (they never hang). But this would probably deserve more explanation then we want to go into spec. So I'll remove this detail.

In addition to these four function, we also define a helper method to allow a relayer to obtain a list of all connections that a module stored.

```golang
    // A relayer can invoke this to `read` all connections stored by a chain.

>     public getAllConnections() // returns a `ConnectionEnd[]`

Author: Good point, this was mean to be used in the "Relayer" sub-section, which we agree to remove. So we can remove this function as well.

```

Refinement remarks (relation to L3):

>   - The `push` function is a higher-level version of `submitDatagram` [ICS018](#references).

Reviewer 3: what does "higher-level" mean?

Author: "more abstract," or "farther away from actual implementation"

Author: we can also say "analogous to"

Reviewer 3: "abstract" or "analogous to" are great.

#### Properties

###### Preliminary abstractions
We introduce several abstractions that are relevant at this point:

1. A `ConnectionParty` is a data type encapsulating the details that identify a party.

```golang
type ConnectionParty interface {
  connectionIdentifier    Identifier
  clientIdentifier        Identifier
  prefix                  Prefix
}
```

2. A `ConnectionState` captures the state of a connection, and may have one of the following values.

```typescript
enum ConnectionState {
  INIT,
  TRYOPEN,
  OPEN,
}
```

3. A `ConnectionEnd` is a data type that captures all the details of a connection at a party.
One of the goals of the connection handshake protocol is to allocate an object of this type at each of Alice and Bob.

```golang
type ConnectionEnd interface {
  state                             ConnectionState
  remoteParty                       ConnectionParty
  localParty                        ConnectionParty

>   version                           string | []string

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  version                           []String
```

}
```

Note that the definition of `ConnectionEnd` includes a _remote_ and a _local_ field; in a specific `ConnectionEnd` object, the local party is the one storing this object, and the remote party is the other one.

4. A `Proof` is a data type that abstracts over the details of a cryptographic proof that any module can create, and another module can verify.
Intuitively, a proof is helpful for some module to guarantee that it is in a certain state.

```golang
type Proof struct {
  content     CommitmentProof // the actual proof
  height      uint64
}

> ```

Reviewer 3: this needs fixing as per TLA+ spec discussion.

Further, we also define the interface of a `Store` on each chain, which maintains the state of the chain.
This is a straightforward key/value store.

```golang
type Store interface {
  // Returns the value stored at key `k`, possibly returning null if no value
  // was previously set at key `k`.
  get(k) -> byte[]

  // Sets the value at position `k` to be `v`, overwritting if this key is
  // already present; always returns null (success).
  set(k string, v byte[]) -> null
}
```

> Importantly, this store is shared with the relayer.

Reviewer 3: What does this mean? The relayer does not have direct access to the store, only via queries. Queries can be made by anyone, relayer, user, scripts, etc.

Author: From the point of view of this spec it does not seem relevant that users or scripts (in addition to relayers) can make these queries. I will add a side-note, however, to mention this detail if you believe it would help.

Reviewer 3: "shared" might imply that the relayer can write there. There is no special access that the relayer requires as compared with other processes. The store is queryable by anyone. Maybe something like:
```suggestion
Importantly, queries to this store can be made.
```

Author: I see your point, agree.

The liveness property, equivalent to [ICS3-Seq-2-Termination] the livenes property in the sequential specification above:

- **[ICS3-Proto-5-Termination]**
If the two parties involved in a connection handshake are correct, then the connection handshake eventually terminates.
Specifically, termination implies that each module allocates in the local state a new `ConnectionEnd` object with `state` field set to `OPEN`.

_Remarks_:

- We could collapse validity and uniqueness under a single property, since they are both defined through an application predicate.
This is not desirable, however, because in the implementation the two properties serve different purposes, so we should keep them separated.

- Note that property **[ICS3-Proto-4-StateConsistency]** works both ways.
This property applies to _any two modules_ (there is no predefined "first" or "second" module in a connection).

### 2.2 Protocol

The ICS3 protocol comprises four steps, summarized below.

1. An actor invokes the `ConnOpenInit` handler at the ICS3 module in one of the chains; this sets off the connection handshake protocol.
In our example, we will use Alice as the party to execute `ConnOpenInit`.

> Once Alice executes this handler, she marks the connection on her end as initialized (i.e., `INIT`).

Reviewer 3: it's not "she" but the handler that marks that.

     |           |                       ConnOpenTry   |
     |           |                         | ►TRYOPEN  |
     |           <--3.a------Relayer--3.a->|           |
     |           |        |                |           |
     |      step 3.b <---/                 |           |
     |     ConnOpenAck                     |           |
     |  ►OPEN    |                         |           |
     |           |<-4.a---Relayer----4.a-->|           |
     |           |                 |       |           |
     |           |                  \-> step 4.b       |
     |           |               ConnOpenConfirm       |
     |           |                         | ►OPEN     |
     +-----------+                         +-----------+
```

#### Protocol handler signatures

We first present the signatures of the four protocol handlers; the connection handshake module at each party implements and exposes these handlers.

```golang
func ConnOpenInit(local ConnectionParty,
                  remote ConnectionParty)

func ConnOpenTry(local ConnectionParty,
                 remote ConnectionParty,
                 remoteVersions string[],

>                  remoteStateProof Proof,

Reviewer 3: this is ambiguous
```suggestion
                 remoteConnectionProof Proof,
```

                 remoteClientProof Proof)

func ConnOpenAck(local ConnectionParty,
                 remoteVersion string,
                 remoteStateProof Proof,
                 remoteClientProof Proof)

func ConnOpenConfirm(local ConnectionParty,
                     remoteStateProof Proof)
```

#### Main Protocol Handlers

We first define the four protocol handlers, and then describe the relayer functionality & datagrams.
Finally, we describe helper functions.

###### ConnOpenInit

This is step 1.

```golang
func ConnOpenInit(local ConnectionParty, remote ConnectionParty)
{
  // Create our own end of the connection.
  connectionEnd.state = INIT
  connectionEnd.local = local
  connectionEnd.remote = remote
  connectionEnd.version = getCompatibleVersions()

  // Validity check. (Explained below in helper functions).
  abortTransactionUnless(validate(connectionEnd))

  // Uniqueness check. (Explained below in helper functions).
  abortTransactionUnless(unique(connectionEnd))

>   // Now we save this connectionE in our local store.

Reviewer 3: In general I would avoid "we" in specs.

Author: Got it, trimming down "our" as well.

  // Since this connectionEnd is in state INIT, the relayer will continue with
  // next steps of the connection handshake protocol.
  setConnection(local.connectionIdentifier, connectionEnd)
}
```

Preconditions:
  - the connection (obtained from the input `local` and `remote` arguments) is valid and unique

Postconditions:
  - the module executing this handler stores a `ConnectionEnd` (matching with the input arguments `local` and `remote`) in state `INIT`
  - function produces no output; may abort if preconditions not met

Implementation remarks:

>   - to ensure termination of the ICS3 protocol, this handler must execute at least once (either one of the chains or both)

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  - to ensure termination of the ICS3 protocol, this handler must execute at least once (either on one of the chains or both)
```

###### ConnOpenTry

This is step 2.b.

```golang
func ConnOpenTry(local ConnectionParty,
                 remote ConnectionParty,

>                  remoteVersions string[],

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
                 remoteVersions []String,
```

                 remoteStateProof Proof,
                 remoteClientProof Proof)
{
  // Create our end of the connection.
  connectionEnd.state = TRYOPEN
  connectionEnd.local = local
  connectionEnd.remote = remote
  connectionEnd.version = pickVersion(remoteVersions)

  // Validity check.
  abortTransactionUnless(validate(connectionEnd))

  // Uniqueness check.

>   abortTransactionUnless(unique(connectionEnd))

Reviewer 3: This should check that either there is no connection of if there is on it is in `INIT` state.

  // `verifyProofs` does a complete verification of proofs.
  // See definition below in helper functions.
  abortTransactionUnless(
    verifyProofs(remoteStateProof, remoteClientProof, connectionEnd))

  // Handler is done: store the connectionEnd and let the relayer handle
  // the next step.
  setConnection(local.connectionIdentifier, connectionEnd)
}
```

Preconditions:
  - the connection (obtained from inputs `local` and `remote`) is valid and unique
  - the module running this handler supports at least one of the versions supplied in the input list `remoteVersions`
  - the two proofs `remoteStateProof` and `remoteClientProof` are syntactically and semantically correct; this is necessary in connection to properties [ICS3-Proto-3-ConnectionIntegrity] and [ICS3-Proto-4-StateConsistency]

Postconditions:
  - the module executing this handler stores a `ConnectionEnd` (matching with the arguments `local` and `remote`) in state `TRYOPEN`
  - no output; may abort if preconditions not met

Implementation remarks:

>   - the `validate` check should also check the field `connectionEnd.version`.

Reviewer 3: not sure what this check entails. I assume `validate` validates all fields.

Author: There is a full description of this function further down in the spec:

> ###### `validate(ConnectionEnd c)` 
> This checks that the object `connectionEnd.local.connectionIdentifier` is valid.
Similar in functionality with `validateConnectionIdentifier` from [ICS 003]; additionally, this function should also validate the `version` field.

###### ConnOpenAck

Step 3.b.

```golang
func ConnOpenAck(local ConnectionParty,
                 remoteVersion string,
                 remoteStateProof Proof,
                 remoteClientProof Proof)
{
  // Search the details of this connection in our local store.
  connectionEnd = get(local.connectionIdentifier)

  // This verification helps guarantee integrity:
  // [ICS3-Proto-3-ConnectionIntegrity].
  abortTransactionUnless(connectionEnd != nil
                         && connectionEnd.local == local)

  // Another integrity check: we should not overwrite a connection that is
  // already `OPEN`.
  abortTransactionUnless(connectionEnd.state == INIT
                         || connectionEnd.state == TRYOPEN)

  // Verification of proofs. See definition below in helper functions.
  abortTransactionUnless(
    verifyProofs(remoteStateProof, remoteClientProof, connectionEnd))

  // Another integrity check: We should not open a connection unless it is for
  // a version that we agree with.

>   abortTransactionUnless(getCompatibleVersions().indexOf(remoteVersion) !== -1)

Reviewer 3: this is too detailed for this spec imo
```suggestion
  abortTransactionUnless(compatibleVersions(remoteVersion))
```

  // Termination (partial -- only at this end)

>   connectionEnd.state = OPEN

Reviewer 3: also set version.

  // Update the connectionEnd in our state.
  setConnection(local.connectionIdentifier, connectionEnd)
}
```

Preconditions:
  - The module executing this handler already has a `ConnectionEnd` stored locally, matching the `local` argument, and in state `INIT` or `TRYOPEN`.
  - The supplied argument `remoteVersion` is supported (compatible)
  - the two proofs `remoteStateProof` and `remoteClientProof` are syntactically and semantically correct; for guaranteeing properties [ICS3-Proto-3-ConnectionIntegrity] and [ICS3-Proto-4-StateConsistency]

Postconditions:
  - the module executing this handler stores a `ConnectionEnd` (matching with the arguments `local`) in state `OPEN`
  - no output

Implementation remarks:

>   - The `abortTransactionUnless(getCompatibleVersions())` check is very low-level. The `valid()` predicate should verify the `version` field, so it would be cleaner to invoke that predicate.

Reviewer 3: what is the `valid()` predicate?

Author: It was a typo. I meant `validate`

  // INIT. The only acceptable state is TRYOPEN.
  abortTransactionUnless(connectionEnd.state == TRYOPEN)

  // Verification of proofs. See definition below in helper functions.
  abortTransactionUnless(
    verifyProofs(remoteStateProof, nil, connectionEnd))

  // Termination.
  connectionEnd.state = OPEN
  setConnection(local.connectionIdentifier, connectionEnd)
}
```

Preconditions:
  - the input proof `remoteStateProof` is syntactically and semantically correct; for guaranteeing property [ICS3-Proto-3-ConnectionIntegrity]
  - The module executing this handler has a `ConnectionEnd` stored locally, (matching the input argument `local`) and in state `TRYOPEN`.

Postconditions:
  - the module executing this handler stores a `ConnectionEnd` (matching with the input argument `local`) in state `OPEN`
  - no output; may abort if preconditions not met

Implementation remarks:
  - (none)

##### Datagrams

A correct relayer can pushe the following datagrams at a chain.
Upon popping a datagram of a certain type, e.g., `ConnOpenConfirm`, a correct chain handles the datagram by invoking an eponymous handler.

```golang

> type ConnOpenInit struct {

Reviewer 3: I would use `ConnXHandler(X)` for handlers then as we don't want the same name.

  local   ConnectionParty
  remote  ConnectionParty
}

type ConnOpenTry struct {
  local               ConnectionParty
  remote              ConnectionParty

>   remoteVersions      string[]

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  remoteVersions      []String
```

  remoteStateProof    Proof
  remoteClientProof   Proof
}

type ConnOpenAck struct {
  local               ConnectionParty

>   remoteVersion       string

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  remoteVersion       String
```
in other places too

  remoteStateProof    Proof
  remoteClientProof   Proof
}

type ConnOpenConfirm struct {
  local             ConnectionParty
  remoteStateProof  Proof
}
```

Notice that the fields in each datagram match with the corresponding protocol handler signature.

> ##### Relayer Logic

Reviewer 3: I think we should remove this section

  // We will push a `ConnOpenAck` to Alice. This is step 3.a.
  if (cAlice.state == INIT || cAlice.state == TRYOPEN) {
    // Construct the appropriate datagram.
    d := ConnOpenAck{
      cBob.remote,                // Alice's party details
      cBob.version,               // Bob's proposed version
      constructStateProof(cBob),
      constructClientProof(cBob)}

    // Push the datagram to Bob's module
    chains[Alice].push(d)
  }
}
```

###### Step 4.a:

```golang
// Assume `cAlice` is a connection on chain Alice.
if (cAlice.state == OPEN) {
  // Fetch the matching connection end from Alice's side
  cBob := chains[Bob].getConnection(cAlice.remote.connectionIdentifier)
  
  // Handshake ConnOpenAck (step 3) done at Alice.
  // We will push a `ConnOpenConfirm` to Bob. This is step 4.a.
  if (cBob.state == TRYOPEN) {
    // Construct the appropriate datagram.
    d := ConnOpenConfirm{
      cBob.local,                 // Bob's party details
      constructStateProof(cAlice)}

    // Push the datagram to Bob's module
    chains[Bob].push(d)
  }
}
```

#### Helper functions & application-level predicates

###### `verifyProofs`

```golang

> func verifyProofs(remoteStateProof Proof, 

Reviewer 3: I would make this function call a `verifyProof` for all proofs. Or even do two `verifyProof` calls in the callers/ handlers.
Then a `verifyProof` will do both what you call syntactical and semantical checks

                  remoteClientProof Proof,
                  connectionEnd ConnectionEnd)
  // Two syntactic check: for each proof, verify that it is authentic.
  // This return either true (success) or false (failure).
  // It is also acceptable that this function triggers an abort (e.g., due to
  // malformed input).

>   t = verifyProofAuthenticity(remoteStateProof, connectionEnd)
>   if t == false {
>     return false
>   }

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  if ~verifyProofAuthenticity(remoteStateProof, connectionEnd) {
    return false
  }
```

Reviewer 3: what does `verifyProofAuthenticity(remoteStateProof, connectionEnd)` do exactly?

  if remoteClientProof != nil {
    // This return either true (success) or false (failure). Aborting is also
    // acceptable.

>     t = verifyProofAuthenticity(remoteClientProof, connectionEnd)
>     if t == false {
>       return false
>     }

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    if ~verifyProofAuthenticity(remoteClientProof, connectionEnd) {
      return false
    }
```
and same everywhere this pattern occurs

  }

  // Semantic checks of both proofs: interpret proof content and verify that
  // they make sense with respect to connection handshake protocol and our
  // state.
  // 1. Verify that the remote party has performed the 'INIT' step for this
  // specific connectionEnd. This helps guarantee the property
  // [ICS3-Proto-3-ConnectionIntegrity].
  // May trigger an abort if the verification fails. Usually returns true
  // or false.
  t = verifyRemoteState(remoteStateProof, ConnectionEnd)
  if t == false {
    return false
  }
  // 2. Verify that the client on the remote party is consistent with my state.

>   // It seems that remoteStateProof is necessary for this step. This also

Reviewer 3: shouldn't be

  // checks, among others, that remoteClientProof.height <= getCurrentHeight()
  // cf. [ICS 003].
  if remoteClientProof != nil {
    // May trigger an abort if the verification fails. Usually returns true
    // or false.

>     t = verifyRemoteClient(
>         remoteClientProof [,remoteStateProof], ConnectionEnd)
>     if t == false {
>       return false
>     }

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    if ~verifyRemoteClient(remoteClientProof, getLocalConsensusState(remoteClientProof.height) {
      return false
    }
```

  }
  return true

> ```

Reviewer 3: I think the proof need rework, like we did in TLA spec. Given the current IBC spec, both proofs must be taken at the same height, `proof_height`. For the verification of the consensus proof we need, in addition, the `consensus_height`.

Preconditions:
  - `remoteClientProof` may be nil
  - `remoteStateProof` and `connectionEnd` have to be well-formed and non-nil

Postconditions:
  - returns true upon success, false if any verification failed.
  - if any of the preconditions are violated, the function may abort.
  - no side-effects.

> ###### `unique(ConnectionEnd c)`

Reviewer 3: i think we can achieve this with `getConnection`. There are two places where this is called and the `tryOpen` one actually needs to get the connection and verify that either it doesn't exist or if it exist then it is in `INIT` state.

###### `pickVersion(counterpartyVersions)` 
This is identical with the one in [ICS 003](#references).

###### `getCompatibleVersions()`
This is identical with the one in [ICS 003](#references).

###### `constructStateProof()` and `constructClientProof()`

These are higher-level variants of the `proof()` method that a connection implements (see [ICS 018](#references) in particular).

###### `verifyProofAuthenticity`, `verifyRemoteState`, `verifyRemoteClient`

These three functions are higher-level versions of `verifyConnectionState` and `verifyClientConsensusState`.

### Open questions:

- Standard cryptographic assumptions (collision-resistant hash functions, public-key signatures). We should mention these once we have more details about the implementation.

- How to capture aborts or incorrect termination? See [issue raised by Anca](https://github.com/informalsystems/ibc-rs/pull/42#discussion_r397077901). Is this necessary? To inform this discussion, more implementation detials are neeeded.

- **Verification of the unbonding period** in `ConnOpenTry`. See [ICS/#403](https://github.com/cosmos/ics/issues/403).

> ## L3: Implementation

Reviewer 3: We should remove this section.
